Besu2024 annual report (#129)
LF-Decentralized-Trust/governance: tac/project-updates/2025/2025-annual-Besu.md

---
layout: default
title: 2024 Annual Review Besu
parent: Project Updates
grand_parent: LF Decentralized Trust TAC
nav_exclude: true
---

## Project Health

The Besu project continues to thrive. [Fleet Mode](https://consensys.io/blog/besu-fleet-the-future-of-rpc-scaling) has bolstered interest in Besu from public blockchain networks and private chains, with both Layer 2 and RPC providers considering Besu for their infrastructure. Community activity on Discord is stable, though external contributions are at a seasonal lull. Overall, the project remains healthy.

## Maintainer Diversity

> The Besu project currently has 21 maintainers, 19  of which work for Consensys Software Inc. The remaining 2 work for Kaleido. Existing maintainers give special attention to new pull requests and are very timely in moving those forward.

Reviewer: Has the project team considered a plan for increasing maintainer diversity and creating a clear pathway for contributors to become maintainers?

Given that the project is already quite mature, it may feel overwhelming for new contributors to get involved. It would be helpful to understand how the team plans to lower the barrier to entry and support contributor growth over time.

This topic has come up in prior discussions as well. The language currently used in the [Besu contributing guidelines](https://github.com/hyperledger/besu/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md#guidelines-for-non-code-and-other-trivial-contributions) may come across as discouraging—potentially suggesting that contributions are only welcome from those who are already experts. Moreover, the very [first paragraph](https://github.com/hyperledger/besu/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md#tada-thanks-for-taking-the-time-to-contribute-tada) in the same page is contradicting this section.

It would be helpful to reframe that section with a more welcoming tone, such as:
"Here are a number of great ways you can get started with meaningful contributions to the project..."

Framing it this way can make the project feel more approachable and inclusive, especially for newer contributors who may be looking for a way in.

Reviewer 2: > Has the project team considered a plan for increasing maintainer diversity and creating a clear pathway for contributors to become maintainers?

> It would be helpful to understand how the team plans to lower the barrier to entry and support contributor growth over time.

Personally I think these could be things we put in the "help required" section

Reviewer 2: > The language currently used in the Besu contributing guidelines may come across as discouraging

I wasn't too comfortable with this statement at the time for the reason you mention, however it was because we had an influx of AI/airdrop farming PRs that were fixing typos in comments etc so the team wanted a statement to deter this behaviour. Other Ethereum client teams did something similar.

I am in favour of rewording but maybe still need to get that core message across.

Perhaps the airdrop farming was a temporary thing and we can trial removing it?
Will seek more feedback from team.

Reviewer 3: it definitely has slowed down.
https://github.com/hyperledger/besu/pulls?q=is%3Apr+trivial+is%3Aclosed
9 in Jan
6 in Feb
since then 1-2 per month

I'm ok with rewording it, I think I'd rather not immediately flip back to having nothing and merging typo PRs. It is handy to have something to point to when one of those PRs comes in, but the language could be softened and still serve that function.

> The Besu project currently has 21 maintainers, 19  of which work for Consensys Software Inc. The remaining 2 work for Kaleido. Existing maintainers give special attention to new pull requests and are very timely in moving those forward.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Besu project currently has 21 maintainers, 18 of which work for Consensys Software Inc.  2 work for Kaleido. Existing maintainers give special attention to new pull requests and are very timely in moving those forward.
```

## Project Adoption

Besu's share of mainnet stake is around 18%. This value is very hard to measure reliably, but anywhere between 15-20% is a good place for an execution client to be.

> 

Reviewer 4: It's probably worth including a reference to the adoption of Besu in the enterprise space, where it's probably 50%+ of blockchain clients, and 90%+ of Ethereum clients.

## Goals

### Performance Against Prior Goals

Feature consolidation is well underway. The sunset plan remains in effect, and work is already ongoing to remove/deprecate private network features which are no longer on our roadmap.

Testing and CI/CD pipelines are much improved after the migration from CircleCI to Github Actions. Every release now has a "burn-in" phase that is run consistently and reproducibly prior to release.

Great strides were made with the Plugin API, so much so that Linea now runs their rollup on mainline Besu with plugins, instead of running their own fork. 

### Next Year's Goals

> The Besu team continues to focus its roadmap on performance, stability, modularity, and upcoming protocol changes like EOF, PeerDAS and Stateless ethereum. The Besu Maintainers intend to support the Fusaka hard fork and take an active role in its delivery.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Besu team continues to focus its roadmap on performance, stability, modularity, and upcoming protocol changes like PeerDAS and Stateless ethereum. The Besu Maintainers intend to support the Fusaka and Glamsterdam hard forks and take an active role in delivery.
```

### Help Required

> Organize more technical feedback meetups on Besu, not only user or application oriented sessions. 

Reviewer: I'm not sure I fully understood the ask, but here’s my initial take:

The approach really depends on the project team, maintainers, and contributors. In the past, community engagement has been successfully driven by a variety of efforts—blog posts on technical features or design decisions, debates around Requests for Comments, and more.

If the goal is to gather community feedback on specific features (for example, within Besu), one effective option is to share updates or highlight topics via the weekly developer newsletters. This can help surface discussions organically and invite broader input from the ecosystem.
